QUICKSTART.md, before:

# Quick Start Guide: Run Locally with Docker Desktop

This guide provides step-by-step instructions to clone and run the Heart Disease Prediction API locally using Docker Desktop (with optional Kubernetes deployment).

---

## Prerequisites

| Requirement | Version | Installation | Required For |
|-------------|---------|--------------|--------------|
| **Docker Desktop** | 4.0+ | [Download](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop/) | Docker & K8s |
| **Git** | 2.0+ | [Download](https://git-scm.com/downloads) | Both |
| **kubectl** | 1.25+ | Included with Docker Desktop | Kubernetes only |

> **Note**: Ensure Docker Desktop is running before proceeding. For Kubernetes, enable it in Docker Desktop settings.

---

## Step 1: Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/shahrukhsaba/mlops.git
cd mlops
```

---

## Step 2: Build Docker Image

```bash
docker build -t heart-disease-api:latest .
```

**Expected Output** (last few lines):
```
Successfully built <image_id>
Successfully tagged heart-disease-api:latest
```

---

## Step 3: Run Docker Container

```bash
docker run -d --name heart-disease-api -p 8000:8000 heart-disease-api:latest
```

**Verify container is running:**
```bash
docker ps
```

**Expected Output:**
```
CONTAINER ID   IMAGE                      STATUS         PORTS
<id>           heart-disease-api:latest   Up X seconds   0.0.0.0:8000->8000/tcp
```

---

## Step 4: Test the API

### Health Check
```bash
curl http://localhost:8000/health
```

**Expected Response:**
```json
{"status": "healthy", "model_loaded": true, "uptime_seconds": 10.5}
```

### Make a Prediction
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/predict \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"age":63,"sex":1,"cp":3,"trestbps":145,"chol":233,"fbs":1,"restecg":0,"thalach":150,"exang":0,"oldpeak":2.3,"slope":0,"ca":0,"thal":1}'
```

**Expected Response:**
```json
{
  "prediction": 0,
  "confidence": 0.2737,
  "risk_level": "Low",
  "probability_no_disease": 0.7263,
  "probability_disease": 0.2737,
  "processing_time_ms": 11.93
}
```

---

## Step 5: View API Documentation

Open in your browser:

| Page | URL | Description |
|------|-----|-------------|
| **Swagger UI** | http://localhost:8000/docs | Interactive API documentation |
| **API Info** | http://localhost:8000/ | Basic API information |

---

## Step 6: Stop and Cleanup

```bash
# Stop the container
docker stop heart-disease-api

# Remove the container
docker rm heart-disease-api

# (Optional) Remove the image
docker rmi heart-disease-api:latest
```

---

## (Optional) Deploy to Kubernetes (Docker Desktop)

Docker Desktop includes a built-in Kubernetes cluster. Follow these steps for production-like deployment.

### Enable Kubernetes in Docker Desktop

1. Open **Docker Desktop**
2. Go to **Settings** (⚙️) → **Kubernetes**
3. Check ✅ **Enable Kubernetes**
4. Click **Apply & Restart**
5. Wait for Kubernetes to start (green indicator)

### Verify Kubernetes is Running

```bash
kubectl cluster-info
kubectl get nodes
```

**Expected Output:**
```
Kubernetes control plane is running at https://kubernetes.docker.internal:6443
NAME             STATUS   ROLES           AGE   VERSION
docker-desktop   Ready    control-plane   1d    v1.28.2
```

### Deploy to Kubernetes

```bash
# Build image (if not already built)
docker build -t heart-disease-api:latest .

# Deploy to Kubernetes
kubectl apply -f k8s/deployment.yaml

# Check deployment status
kubectl get deployments
kubectl get pods
kubectl get svc
```

**Expected Output:**
```
NAME                READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE
heart-disease-api   2/2     2            2

NAME                                 READY   STATUS    RESTARTS
heart-disease-api-xxxxx-yyyyy        1/1     Running   0
heart-disease-api-xxxxx-zzzzz        1/1     Running   0

NAME                TYPE           CLUSTER-IP     EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)
heart-disease-api   LoadBalancer   10.x.x.x       localhost     80:xxxxx/TCP
```

### Test via Kubernetes (Port 80)

```bash
# Health check
curl http://localhost:80/health

# Prediction
curl -X POST http://localhost:80/predict \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"age":63,"sex":1,"cp":3,"trestbps":145,"chol":233,"fbs":1,"restecg":0,"thalach":150,"exang":0,"oldpeak":2.3,"slope":0,"ca":0,"thal":1}'
```

### View Kubernetes Dashboard (Optional)

```bash
# View pod logs
kubectl logs -l app=heart-disease-api --tail=20

# Describe deployment
kubectl describe deployment heart-disease-api
```

### Cleanup Kubernetes Deployment

```bash
kubectl delete -f k8s/deployment.yaml
```

---

## Docker vs Kubernetes Comparison

| Feature | Docker (Step 3) | Kubernetes (Optional) |
|---------|-----------------|----------------------|
| **Port** | `localhost:8000` | `localhost:80` |
| **Replicas** | 1 container | 2+ pods (auto-scaled) |
| **Health Checks** | Manual | Automatic (liveness/readiness) |
| **Load Balancing** | None | Built-in LoadBalancer |
| **Auto-restart** | `--restart=always` | Automatic |
| **Best For** | Development/Testing | Production-like |

---

## Quick Commands Reference

| Action | Command |
|--------|---------|
| Clone repo | `git clone https://github.com/shahrukhsaba/mlops.git && cd mlops` |
| Build image | `docker build -t heart-disease-api:latest .` |
| Run container | `docker run -d --name heart-disease-api -p 8000:8000 heart-disease-api:latest` |
| Check status | `docker ps` |
| View logs | `docker logs heart-disease-api` |
| Health check | `curl http://localhost:8000/health` |
| Predict | `curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/predict -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"age":63,"sex":1,"cp":3,"trestbps":145,"chol":233,"fbs":1,"restecg":0,"thalach":150,"exang":0,"oldpeak":2.3,"slope":0,"ca":0,"thal":1}'` |
| Stop | `docker stop heart-disease-api && docker rm heart-disease-api` |

---

## One-Liner (Copy & Paste)

```bash
# Clone, build, and run in one command
git clone https://github.com/shahrukhsaba/mlops.git && \
cd mlops && \
docker build -t heart-disease-api:latest . && \
docker run -d --name heart-disease-api -p 8000:8000 heart-disease-api:latest && \
echo "API running at http://localhost:8000"
```

---

## Troubleshooting

### Port 8000 already in use
```bash
# Find what's using port 8000
lsof -i :8000

# Kill the process or use a different port
docker run -d --name heart-disease-api -p 8080:8000 heart-disease-api:latest
# Access at http://localhost:8080 instead
```

### Container won't start
```bash
# Check logs for errors
docker logs heart-disease-api

# Remove and rebuild
docker rm heart-disease-api
docker rmi heart-disease-api:latest
docker build -t heart-disease-api:latest .
docker run -d --name heart-disease-api -p 8000:8000 heart-disease-api:latest
```

### Docker Desktop not running
```
Error: Cannot connect to the Docker daemon
```
**Solution**: Start Docker Desktop application and wait for it to initialize.

---

---

## Deploy to Cloud (Render.com) - FREE

Deploy your API to the cloud with a public URL!

### Step 1: Create Render Account

1. Go to [render.com](https://render.com)
2. Sign up with **GitHub** (recommended)
3. Authorize Render to access your repositories

### Step 2: Deploy from GitHub

**Option A: One-Click Deploy (Blueprint)**

1. Go to [Render Dashboard](https://dashboard.render.com)
2. Click **New** → **Blueprint**
3. Connect your GitHub repo: `shahrukhsaba/mlops`
4. Render will detect `render.yaml` and deploy automatically

**Option B: Manual Deploy**

1. Go to [Render Dashboard](https://dashboard.render.com)
2. Click **New** → **Web Service**
3. Connect GitHub repo: `shahrukhsaba/mlops`
4. Configure:
   - **Name**: `heart-disease-api`
   - **Environment**: `Docker`
   - **Plan**: `Free`
   - **Health Check Path**: `/health`
5. Click **Create Web Service**

### Step 3: Wait for Deployment

- Build takes ~5-10 minutes on first deploy
- Check build logs in Render dashboard
- Once deployed, you'll get a URL like:
  ```
  https://heart-disease-api.onrender.com
  ```

### Step 4: Test Your Live API

```bash
# Health check
curl https://heart-disease-api.onrender.com/health

# Make prediction
curl -X POST https://heart-disease-api.onrender.com/predict \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"age":63,"sex":1,"cp":3,"trestbps":145,"chol":233,"fbs":1,"restecg":0,"thalach":150,"exang":0,"oldpeak":2.3,"slope":0,"ca":0,"thal":1}'

# View docs
open https://heart-disease-api.onrender.com/docs
```

### Render Free Tier Notes

| Feature | Limit |
|---------|-------|
| **Compute** | 750 hours/month |
| **Sleep** | Spins down after 15 min inactivity |
| **Wake up** | ~30 seconds on first request |
| **Bandwidth** | 100 GB/month |

> **Note**: Free tier services sleep after inactivity. First request may take ~30s to wake up.

---

## Next Steps

- [Full README](README.md) - Complete project documentation
- [Assignment Report](reports/MLOps_Assignment_Report.md) - Detailed report
- [Kubernetes Deployment](README.md#step-7-production-deployment-7-marks) - Deploy to Kubernetes

---

**Repository**: https://github.com/shahrukhsaba/mlops

Commit message:

Update Render endpoint and add Grafana/local deployment notes
- Updated Render URL to https://heart-disease-api-sdgp.onrender.com
- Added note: Grafana only available in local deployment
- Added note: Local deployment is preferred for full functionality

QUICKSTART.md, after:

# Quick Start Guide: Run Locally with Docker Desktop

This guide provides step-by-step instructions to clone and run the Heart Disease Prediction API locally using Docker Desktop (with optional Kubernetes deployment).

---

## Prerequisites

| Requirement | Version | Installation | Required For |
|-------------|---------|--------------|--------------|
| **Docker Desktop** | 4.0+ | [Download](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop/) | Docker & K8s |
| **Git** | 2.0+ | [Download](https://git-scm.com/downloads) | Both |
| **kubectl** | 1.25+ | Included with Docker Desktop | Kubernetes only |

> **Note**: Ensure Docker Desktop is running before proceeding. For Kubernetes, enable it in Docker Desktop settings.

---

## Step 1: Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/shahrukhsaba/mlops.git
cd mlops
```

---

## Step 2: Build Docker Image

```bash
docker build -t heart-disease-api:latest .
```

**Expected Output** (last few lines):
```
Successfully built <image_id>
Successfully tagged heart-disease-api:latest
```

---

## Step 3: Run Docker Container

```bash
docker run -d --name heart-disease-api -p 8000:8000 heart-disease-api:latest
```

**Verify container is running:**
```bash
docker ps
```

**Expected Output:**
```
CONTAINER ID   IMAGE                      STATUS         PORTS
<id>           heart-disease-api:latest   Up X seconds   0.0.0.0:8000->8000/tcp
```

---

## Step 4: Test the API

### Health Check
```bash
curl http://localhost:8000/health
```

**Expected Response:**
```json
{"status": "healthy", "model_loaded": true, "uptime_seconds": 10.5}
```

### Make a Prediction
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/predict \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"age":63,"sex":1,"cp":3,"trestbps":145,"chol":233,"fbs":1,"restecg":0,"thalach":150,"exang":0,"oldpeak":2.3,"slope":0,"ca":0,"thal":1}'
```

**Expected Response:**
```json
{
  "prediction": 0,
  "confidence": 0.2737,
  "risk_level": "Low",
  "probability_no_disease": 0.7263,
  "probability_disease": 0.2737,
  "processing_time_ms": 11.93
}
```

---

## Step 5: View API Documentation

Open in your browser:

| Page | URL | Description |
|------|-----|-------------|
| **Swagger UI** | http://localhost:8000/docs | Interactive API documentation |
| **API Info** | http://localhost:8000/ | Basic API information |

---

## Step 6: Stop and Cleanup

```bash
# Stop the container
docker stop heart-disease-api

# Remove the container
docker rm heart-disease-api

# (Optional) Remove the image
docker rmi heart-disease-api:latest
```

---

## (Optional) Deploy to Kubernetes (Docker Desktop)

Docker Desktop includes a built-in Kubernetes cluster. Follow these steps for production-like deployment.

### Enable Kubernetes in Docker Desktop

1. Open **Docker Desktop**
2. Go to **Settings** (⚙️) → **Kubernetes**
3. Check ✅ **Enable Kubernetes**
4. Click **Apply & Restart**
5. Wait for Kubernetes to start (green indicator)

### Verify Kubernetes is Running

```bash
kubectl cluster-info
kubectl get nodes
```

**Expected Output:**
```
Kubernetes control plane is running at https://kubernetes.docker.internal:6443
NAME             STATUS   ROLES           AGE   VERSION
docker-desktop   Ready    control-plane   1d    v1.28.2
```

### Deploy to Kubernetes

```bash
# Build image (if not already built)
docker build -t heart-disease-api:latest .

# Deploy to Kubernetes
kubectl apply -f k8s/deployment.yaml

# Check deployment status
kubectl get deployments
kubectl get pods
kubectl get svc
```

**Expected Output:**
```
NAME                READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE
heart-disease-api   2/2     2            2

NAME                                 READY   STATUS    RESTARTS
heart-disease-api-xxxxx-yyyyy        1/1     Running   0
heart-disease-api-xxxxx-zzzzz        1/1     Running   0

NAME                TYPE           CLUSTER-IP     EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)
heart-disease-api   LoadBalancer   10.x.x.x       localhost     80:xxxxx/TCP
```

### Test via Kubernetes (Port 80)

```bash
# Health check
curl http://localhost:80/health

# Prediction
curl -X POST http://localhost:80/predict \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"age":63,"sex":1,"cp":3,"trestbps":145,"chol":233,"fbs":1,"restecg":0,"thalach":150,"exang":0,"oldpeak":2.3,"slope":0,"ca":0,"thal":1}'
```

### View Kubernetes Dashboard (Optional)

```bash
# View pod logs
kubectl logs -l app=heart-disease-api --tail=20

# Describe deployment
kubectl describe deployment heart-disease-api
```

### Cleanup Kubernetes Deployment

```bash
kubectl delete -f k8s/deployment.yaml
```

---

## Docker vs Kubernetes Comparison

| Feature | Docker (Step 3) | Kubernetes (Optional) |
|---------|-----------------|----------------------|
| **Port** | `localhost:8000` | `localhost:80` |
| **Replicas** | 1 container | 2+ pods (auto-scaled) |
| **Health Checks** | Manual | Automatic (liveness/readiness) |
| **Load Balancing** | None | Built-in LoadBalancer |
| **Auto-restart** | `--restart=always` | Automatic |
| **Best For** | Development/Testing | Production-like |

---

## Quick Commands Reference

| Action | Command |
|--------|---------|
| Clone repo | `git clone https://github.com/shahrukhsaba/mlops.git && cd mlops` |
| Build image | `docker build -t heart-disease-api:latest .` |
| Run container | `docker run -d --name heart-disease-api -p 8000:8000 heart-disease-api:latest` |
| Check status | `docker ps` |
| View logs | `docker logs heart-disease-api` |
| Health check | `curl http://localhost:8000/health` |
| Predict | `curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/predict -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d '{"age":63,"sex":1,"cp":3,"trestbps":145,"chol":233,"fbs":1,"restecg":0,"thalach":150,"exang":0,"oldpeak":2.3,"slope":0,"ca":0,"thal":1}'` |
| Stop | `docker stop heart-disease-api && docker rm heart-disease-api` |

---

## One-Liner (Copy & Paste)

```bash
# Clone, build, and run in one command
git clone https://github.com/shahrukhsaba/mlops.git && \
cd mlops && \
docker build -t heart-disease-api:latest . && \
docker run -d --name heart-disease-api -p 8000:8000 heart-disease-api:latest && \
echo "API running at http://localhost:8000"
```

---

## Troubleshooting

### Port 8000 already in use
```bash
# Find what's using port 8000
lsof -i :8000

# Kill the process or use a different port
docker run -d --name heart-disease-api -p 8080:8000 heart-disease-api:latest
# Access at http://localhost:8080 instead
```

### Container won't start
```bash
# Check logs for errors
docker logs heart-disease-api

# Remove and rebuild
docker rm heart-disease-api
docker rmi heart-disease-api:latest
docker build -t heart-disease-api:latest .
docker run -d --name heart-disease-api -p 8000:8000 heart-disease-api:latest
```

### Docker Desktop not running
```
Error: Cannot connect to the Docker daemon
```
**Solution**: Start Docker Desktop application and wait for it to initialize.

---

---

## Deploy to Cloud (Render.com) - FREE

Deploy your API to the cloud with a public URL!

> ⚠️ **Important**: Grafana monitoring dashboard is **only available in local deployment** (Docker/Kubernetes). Cloud deployment only exposes the `/metrics` endpoint. **Local deployment is preferred** for full functionality including monitoring.

### Step 1: Create Render Account

1. Go to [render.com](https://render.com)
2. Sign up with **GitHub** (recommended)
3. Authorize Render to access your repositories

### Step 2: Deploy from GitHub

**Option A: One-Click Deploy (Blueprint)**

1. Go to [Render Dashboard](https://dashboard.render.com)
2. Click **New** → **Blueprint**
3. Connect your GitHub repo: `shahrukhsaba/mlops`
4. Render will detect `render.yaml` and deploy automatically

**Option B: Manual Deploy**

1. Go to [Render Dashboard](https://dashboard.render.com)
2. Click **New** → **Web Service**
3. Connect GitHub repo: `shahrukhsaba/mlops`
4. Configure:
   - **Name**: `heart-disease-api`
   - **Environment**: `Docker`
   - **Plan**: `Free`
   - **Health Check Path**: `/health`
5. Click **Create Web Service**

### Step 3: Wait for Deployment

- Build takes ~5-10 minutes on first deploy
- Check build logs in Render dashboard
- Once deployed, you'll get a URL like:
  ```
  https://heart-disease-api-sdgp.onrender.com
  ```

### Step 4: Test Your Live API

```bash
# Health check
curl https://heart-disease-api-sdgp.onrender.com/health

# Make prediction
curl -X POST https://heart-disease-api-sdgp.onrender.com/predict \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"age":63,"sex":1,"cp":3,"trestbps":145,"chol":233,"fbs":1,"restecg":0,"thalach":150,"exang":0,"oldpeak":2.3,"slope":0,"ca":0,"thal":1}'

# View docs
open https://heart-disease-api-sdgp.onrender.com/docs
```

### Render Free Tier Notes

| Feature | Limit |
|---------|-------|
| **Compute** | 750 hours/month |
| **Sleep** | Spins down after 15 min inactivity |
| **Wake up** | ~30 seconds on first request |
| **Bandwidth** | 100 GB/month |

> **Note**: Free tier services sleep after inactivity. First request may take ~30s to wake up.

---

## Next Steps

- [Full README](README.md) - Complete project documentation
- [Assignment Report](reports/MLOps_Assignment_Report.md) - Detailed report
- [Kubernetes Deployment](README.md#step-7-production-deployment-7-marks) - Deploy to Kubernetes

---

**Repository**: https://github.com/shahrukhsaba/mlops
